---
layout: single
title: "A paper on mantle convection interacting with a basal magma ocean"
header:
  image: /assets/images/Labrosse_etal2024_Fig1.jpg
  image_description: "Evolution of the temperature, FeO content and
  heat producing elements content with time"

date: 2024-11-11
---

Fractional crystallisation of a basal magma ocean (BMO) has been
proposed to explain the formation of large scale compositional
variations in the mantle and the persistence of partially molten
patches in the lowermost mantle. We present a complete set of
equations for the thermal and compositional evolution of the BMO and
show that it can be implemented in a mantle convection code to solve
the long term mantle evolution problem. The presence of the BMO
modifies the dynamics of the mantle in several ways. The phase
equilibrium at the bottom of the solid mantle implies a change of
mechanical boundary condition, which helps solid state convection. The
net freezing of the BMO implies a change of computational domain,
which is treated by mapping the radial coordinate on a constant
thickness domain. Fractional melting and freezing at the boundary
makes the composition of the BMO and the solid mantle evolve, which is
treated using Lagrangian tracers. A sample calculation shows that the
persistence of the BMO and its long term evolution drastically changes
the dynamics of the solid mantle by promoting downwelling currents and
large scale flow. The gradual increase of the FeO content in the BMO
and in the solid that crystallises from it leads to the stabilisation
of large scale thermo-compositional piles at the bottom of the mantle,
possibly explaining the observations from seismology.

This paper is open access and the paper is available
[here](https://doi.org/10.5802/crgeos.275).


Full citations:
>Labrosse, S., Morison, A., and Tackley, P. J. Solid-state mantle
>convection coupled with a crystallising basal magma
>ocean. C. R. Geosciences, **356**, 2024.
>https://doi.org/10.5802/crgeos.275
